Four Python 3.8 installers are available for download - two each for the 32-bit and 64-bit versions of the interpreter. The web installer is a small initial download, and it will automatically download the required components as necessary. The offline installer includes the components necessary for a default installation and only requires an internet connection for optional features. See Installing Without Downloading for other ways to avoid downloading during installation.

After starting the installer, one of two options may be selected:


Before we start Python programming, we need to have an interpreter to interpret and run our programs. There are certain online interpreters like https://ide.geeksforgeeks.org/, http://ideone.com/ or http://codepad.org/ that can be used to run Python programs without installing an interpreter.

Windows: There are many interpreters available freely to run Python scripts like IDLE (Integrated Development Environment) that comes bundled with the Python software downloaded from http://python.org/.

Linux: Python comes preinstalled with popular Linux distros such as Ubuntu and Fedora. To check which version of Python you’re running, type “python” in the terminal emulator. The interpreter should start and print the version number.

macOS: Generally, Python 2.7 comes bundled with macOS. You’ll have to manually install Python 3 from http://python.org/.



Python is a high-level, general-purpose and a very popular programming language. Python programming language (latest Python 3) is being used in web development, Machine Learning applications, along with all cutting edge technology in Software Industry.

This specially designed Python tutorial will help you learn Python in most efficient way, with the topics from basics to advanced (like Web-scraping, Django, Deep-Learning, etc.) with examples. Python Programming Language is very well suited for Beginners, also for experienced programmers with other programming languages like C++ and Java.


Below are some facts about Python Programming Language:

Python is currently the most widely used multi-purpose, high-level programming language.
Python allows programming in Object-Oriented and Procedural paradigms.
Python programs generally are smaller than other programming languages like Java. Programmers have to type relatively less and indentation requirement of the language, makes them readable all the time.
Python language is being used by almost all tech-giant companies like – Google, Amazon, Facebook, Instagram, Dropbox, Uber… etc.
The biggest strength of Python is huge collection of standard library which can be used for th